Go ahead.
I'm sorry, you were analyzing something.
Well, it's just, I analyzed it.
I mean, I'm very glad that I did.
I'm glad that it came up that way because I've been trying to think of a better, I'm trying to come to a better view of it.
And what I just said is actually very important to me in that it sort of clicked and made sense now.
That what's, the problem here is the degree to which one must
separate oneself from the external stimuli in order to do what you do.
And especially if you don't like the way it is.
But you cannot ever simply lose yourself in what you do and not take into account what's on the outside.
You mentioned earlier, and I think it is true to me, in light of what you've been saying,
that you lived in about 40 different places in the course of your life?
Immensely destructive.
I mean, there were advantages to some extent, but I sometimes sit and count on my fingers the number of different places.
Can you just throw out a couple?
Not 40, but... Just give me an idea.
I was born in Manhattan, and I lived in...
Manhattan in Westchester County, New York, in Jamaica, in New Hampshire.
Now, this is a pretty Southern County summer camp in New New Hampshire, but I went there for four years.
Where did you go to summer camp in New Hampshire?
I went to a summer camp in New Hampshire.
It was all with Camp Lawrence, up in Lakewood,
Very young, very young.
And then I went to camp also at Orleans.
And then I lived in two places in Winchester and Austin, and I lived, I went to Harvard for four years as a graduate student, two.
And I lived in San Francisco.
I lived in Seattle for seven years.
I lived, or six rather.
Now what, are you a chiropractic sort, or has this been circumstance?
How can I deny that?
I see here a 200-acre... I see the quintessence of permanence here.
I hope to make this my last stop, but you just never know.
I seem to be... Do you crave permanence to it?
Maybe that's too strong a word.
I do until I get it and then I move on.
Isn't that strange?
It's contradictory, of course, but you understand what I mean.
It's sort of like a young, barren clone.
And it really looks like you're digging in here, though.
Yeah, and it's exhausting.
It's exhausting.
This was two years' worth of work, and we didn't intend it to be.
We thought it was, we were told by our magnificent architect that it was going to take six months.
It ended up taking the actual renovation, taking three times that, taking a year and a half, and the price was doubled.
So that's a renovated house over there?
Everything was wonderful.
We renovated it.
How long was that?
1824.
Great thing about that.
Something that I discovered about the house, which I think may not have been known since it was built, is that if you look at the original footprint of the house, all of the dimensions, not all of them, but many, are 18 by 24 or something of that.
five by threes, six by eight, or whatever.
It's considered.
And if you add up the square footage of the footprint, the original portion of the house computer is an addition.
It's 1,824 square feet.
Architects then were also mystics.
They were actually just mystics.
They did things like that.
And it may be that
Since 1824, no one was building that in Manhattan, but I discovered it in doing the renovation.
There are a couple of things I want to cover.
Again, I guess I started with, we talked about the number of books, four novels, two questions of stories.
You're perhaps at mid-career, maybe.
Where do you see it?
I mean, do you see it as a corpus, I guess, is one way of doing it?
I see it as
I was always trying to do better.
That's the main thing.
It's somewhat disappointing that when you look back, you see that this is what you've done over a period of years, and this is all you've come out with.
And yet, you expect each time to do better.
And then you look back, and eventually it will be the best that I can do.
And then we'll have to stand for what I've done.
I have until this point, and I hope that it continues that way, to see each book that I write as kind of just practice for the next.
And I don't, for instance, people have asked me this a million times.
I say, do you reread your own books yet?
I never do that.
As much as I may deeply love the characters in the book,
or the book itself, as I'm writing it, as devoted as I may be, after I've written it, it goes on the shelf and I never get it again.
Really?
No.
Did you read it?
I did a couple of things.
What I do is when I go on a book tour or do that kind of thing, I either give a lecture or a speech, and it's quite exhausting in that
I believe it as a point of honor, or I have believed until now, I think actually exempt myself from this, but it has to be a point of honor not to give the same speech or lecture twice.
Because I remember from having been in college and graduate school, what that's like, to get people who are literally dead on their feet, or almost literally dead on their feet, and they come up and they drone on.
So that whenever I do the lecture or speech, I tend to make them do it.
We go to a 14 city book tour and give 25 different things like that.
It's exhausting.
It takes a lot of time to come up with.
So what I've done, for the last tour, I had a body that was always changing.
It was never the same thing twice, but there were certain things that were repeated, different stories that I told.
And if I go on a book tour for this book,
What, will you talk about the writing of the book?
No, no, I hate to talk about it.
I haven't questioned you at all about the book.
Again, it seems novelist for me, the toughest, the most challenging, but the toughest.
I hate to talk.
My job is to read the book, really, and it's stupid of me to try and ask you, and I haven't.
I try and stay away from it, and then you'll see when I write a piece, I'll discuss the book at some length, you know,
But, you know, I am interested in the character.
I hate to talk about it.
I'm really interested in the body of work.
I did an interview with Nadine Mortimer a couple of months ago when she was in Cambridge doing the Morton Lectures.
And she said that everything, she feels that everything she does is almost the same work.
But she said, you know, you think you've written about it, but then you walk around, it's like looking at a sculpture, looking at it from a different angle.
It's almost all the
works are, looks at the same work.
She quoted, who did she quote?
Which photographer did she quote?
Which sculptor?
All these pieces are the same work.
I mean, I forget who was.
There's two things about that.
I've noticed this all the time.
One is that you have to really, you're in good shape if you impress people simultaneously as being both, as being, quote,
writing the same thing over and over again, and secondly, as being astoundingly different from book to book.
And what you want is both of those things.
Because one is a consistency of integrity and vision and skill, and the other is a tremendous variety and breadth of imagination.
So I like it when people say, oh my goodness, you know, this book is about, as if it were about a flying horse, and it wasn't about
justice, really.
And then this book is about a guy, a criminal, who has to flee to have to flee to Brazil.
And then this one is about a family who becomes a socialist.
And this story is about an Indian woman in Mexico.
And this story is about an old, a four-year-old Russian boy, whatever.
And if they think that you're
It's amazingly different.
You have tremendous versatility, and at the same time, there's another set of thought, which is the themes are the same, and the concerns are the same, and the gravity is the same.
Well, is it an exploration for you, when you're writing?
If you pretty much have a sense of where it's going, I mean, is it an exploration?
Are you learning something as you go along, I guess?
Oh, yes, but on the other hand,
I've said this before, but I certainly don't want to say anything.
This is really true.
What I do, in terms of technique and approach and philosophy, is I always start out with the very last sentence of the book.
That's how I write a book or a story.
I have the last sentence.
And then it's as if the last sentence were a rock.
and I take it, and I throw it as far as I can, and then I go to it.
And I can go left, I can go right, I can go down and up, I can make circles, detours, it doesn't matter.
I have, I know where I'm going, I know where I may be at, and so I'm free, you know, to have, who was it, was Baudelaire who said, live like a bourgeois so you can write like a wild man.
This discipline, this knowing the point of age,
allows me to take tremendous discourages if I want.
If I know I'm never going to get off the track and just know exactly what I'm going to do.
And that's a combination of both freedom and discipline.
Do you know where the story is ending up?
Yeah.
I mean, I heard it was the last sentence, but do you ever change the last sentence?
I don't think so.
And you hold to it.
Yeah.
Well, let's say the last sentence is more or less what the book is about.
I mean, it is what the book is about.
The last sentence of this book.
Yeah.
I'll read it to you.
I'm sorry.
One of these I'm going to ask you to inscribe to my editor at Holt.
All this time, my heart has told me nothing but to love and protect.
The message has been strong through the twists and turns, and it has never varied.
So, you know, that's just what I told you about.
To protect and to protect and to protect.
I was born to protect the ones I love.
And may God continue to give me ways to protect and serve them, even though they are God.
And that's the sentence that I have in the end.
That's how the book was born, with that passage.
Is that the process for you?
Born with the end.
Does it come?
I mean, as Shakespeare, do you pull it out of thin air?
I don't, yes, I don't know.
Poets, imagination, bodies, forms of things I know.
I guess what it really is, where does it come from?
It comes from the accumulated experience, concerns, fears, passions, loves that one has.
And if you're thinking about them either consciously or subconsciously, you make them into
and eventually into work.
And that particular sentence is about what the book is about, which no one, again, no reviewer will get this.
They won't understand it.
Because it's not my place to come in to explain what my book is about.
What that sentence is about is the Holocaust.
And the sentence says, do you mind my quoting that?
anything I say in quality.
He's the protagonist.
But I don't want to give away anything either.
He says, let me continue to give me ways to protect them, even though they're dumb.
And what I'm talking about here is not just the Holocaust of the Jews, necessarily, but any situation where people have been
killed in that fashion or in other fashions where you lose the ones you want to, well, unnecessary, well, it's one thing if God takes them at the end of their lifespan or if they're ill for whatever reason, it's natural, more or less.
But when they are present, it's unbearable and unendurable.
And what this is about is how do you, how even after that,
after you've lost, how do you deal with it?
How do you continue to think of it?
So you haven't finished the quote, you haven't finished it, so we'll see why that is, although very few viewers will.
You're making that as a, you're hopeful that they get it, but you don't expect them.
They won't.
Most people will say this is a really funny quote.
So did you start then with this
This is something that you wanted to write about?
It is a narrated book?
Did you have this character?
Did you have the sentence?
Maybe it's a chicken and an egg.
Well, let's see now.
It started... How did it start?
It starts with the last sentence here.
It starts with the last sentence.
850-odd interview.
Somebody starts with the end.
That's great.
And the funny thing is, I also, I usually eat dessert before I eat dessert.
Really?
Yeah.
And my wife thinks I'm absolutely out of my way.
You read from left to right or from right?
When I read Hebrew, I read from left to right.
But I usually eat dessert first, and then I eat the rest of the meal.
I prefer to do it that way.
It's not because of a sweet tooth or anything.
You have the treat first?
Do you have a sweet dessert?
No, I think dessert is the
the least substantive.
So I take the thing.
Do I have the least substantive first?
Oh, I also like it.
Oh, okay.
Essential.
Just like a kid, I save the best part for the last thing when I eat, for example.
And I think the dessert is less than the main course, so I have dessert first.
I like dessert, but I want to put things in a proper perspective, so I eat them.
you can see with me at lunch.
Although this book, strangely enough, I hope it doesn't signal the end of my career.
In other words, I might be hit by a boss or something.
But this book, I think I was deserved, and yet it was certainly not first.
So that's out of the pattern.
Do that again.
This book is dessert?
Yeah, this is the dessert.
The book, the whole book?
Yeah.
So much of the Great War was like, to me, sort of like a giant roast of ox.
And I had a kind of spit, sizzling, all kinds of seasonings and everything like that.
Vegetables with it on.
And this is like a chocolate chip.
It's just entirely different.
The same theme.
To continue the metaphor, it's part of the same meal, though.
That's right.
And the same themes in it.
methods the same, it's identifiable as if it's something that's consistent with my concerns.
That's almost exactly what Nathan Bordemar said a little while ago.
I mean, we're talking about it and looking at it from it.
Instead of looking at the front of it, we're looking at the side of it.
Yeah, that's it.
Or in a gastricology.
You must be getting hungry.
Let's schedule another 10 minutes.
Okay, I'm going to ask you, maybe if you sign these here, I don't want to bother you for sure.
Are we going to come back here?
I mean, it depends on what time do you want to go.
I should leave the hour, I would think.
I've got plenty of material, by the way.
Well, maybe you just want to come back and I'll sign it.
Okay, that'd be great.
You did say that
You approach every book as if it's present to the next one.
So every book is almost a penultimate book, is that right?
It's like being an athlete.
When you're an athlete, since when do you think about your previous performances?
You only think about breaking the record.
If you're a high jumper and you've jumped
12, I don't know what the records are now, but let's just say 12 feet.
I think it's a lot more than that.
But let's make it a runner.
You brought up a four minute mile.
You're not thinking about that.
That four minute mile means nothing to you anymore.
Because if you run another four minute mile, you must run better than a four minute mile.
So you're not thinking of your previous performances.
You only want to do better.
In terms of work, a previous book was a main course, it was an entree, this is the dessert.
So will the next book be a main course, an appetizer, or what?
The next book is, I think, is going to be, it all depends on the timing, a short story.
So that's kind of a stepping outside, and that's what
I don't know how you'd class that.
I guess there's separate tracks for novels and short stories.
And so in terms of the short stories, the next book, well, depends on what happens and isn't done yet.
Is this exhausting work for you, or is it, no, no, this is what makes me able to continue?
That's another thing.
I frequently hear writers talk about how taxing it is to write a book.
For me, it's taxing
pay taxes.
It's also taxes to move.
To move on those goddamn books.
Writing is easy.
Moving them is a difficult part.
I find it difficult to do things like that, but to write it is the breath of life.
It's the easiest thing.
It's pure enjoyment.
It's not worth it.
I don't feel guilty about too many things, but one of the things I do feel guilty about
is that I actually get paid for doing what I would do anyway, and that's what I'd love to do tomorrow.
I mean, that may sound trite, but it's absolutely true.
That it doesn't feel like work, that's all I've worked.
I would do it anyway, even if I were to have a job, you know, there's a shoe sale.
I would do it.
Of course, many people don't.
It's the kind of thing they can do, even if you don't make money.
And I, luckily, I think that's what I'm doing.
And then let's just talk briefly then about the time, maybe you can compare the satisfaction that you get from writing your books with the satisfaction that you get from your journal.
Obviously you enjoy it.
I enjoy it, but it's a different thing.
It's a totally different thing.
People wrap vision.
The thing about a book is that what deservedly gets more attention as well.
You get wider attention with journalism.
One might have more of an effect.
But you get the implies right away, too, don't you?
Yeah.
And that is a kick, isn't it?
You do.
And when you influence policy, then I suppose that's the reason one does it, is to try to bend things in one way.
But those are superficial little words that they don't weigh as heavily as writing a book and knowing that this will be in libraries throughout the world.
or after you're gone, somebody wants to name it someday.
Somebody can pick it up and see what you did.
And it doesn't really happen with this paper.
In fact, it's so many people who said something.
Somebody that was going to see recently said, who cares about walking with me?
I mean, the newspaper stuff, that's temporal satisfaction.
Writing pictures is different.
But just the same one that I talked about, how you have the concentration in your own track at the same time you kind of pay attention to what's happening with the external signal.
For me, that's kind of a healthy balance between one and the other.
I have the newspaper stuff.
I love to have a piece in the Wall Street Journal.
They run me at the top of the editorial page and put me in the cover.
It makes you feel wonderful and when I, you know,
people would go and talk to the political figures and prime ministers and stuff like that.
That always was as exciting as that.
And at the same time, I was also the part greater than the woman that we had.
How did that come about?
Is it something you sought out, or was it... Well, we were beginning to talk about it when I was in college.
I knew that I was going to be a writer.
I knew from a very early age.
When I was in college, I looked about and I saw that the publishing industry in the literary world was beginning the process of destruction.
One thing about me is that I always looked for a very long term.
I looked at things in the long run.
For instance, 10 years ago, I began warning that Russia was going to go move to the
to sort of a revanchious position.
And I still say that.
And I expected it to take 10, 15, 20 years, but I think it's going to happen.
I look at things in a very long time.
And back then, as a young student, I looked around and I saw the blur in the world, which was in America anyway, and I felt like the rest of the world was relevant to what I do, particularly.
with the process of disintegration.
So I said to myself, if I'm not going to be taken with it, because this is my main passion, this is my passion in my life is to write fiction, then what I have to do is I have to have two passions.
I went to graduate school to study political science, diplomacy, economics, war, and let the record show that
There were two stacks of fauna bears in the middle of the floor.
Take a look at those books.
I saw two Kissinger books when I came in.
The others there was David McCullers.
Oh, that's a very history.
I just can't see around the corner.
Military intelligence is my field.
I studied very hard.
I did well.
I worked in that.
Essentially, my strong point is military analysis.
I can analyze the order of battle, and therefore the chances of one country as opposed to another, or one alliance as opposed to another, and I can do that as well.
So I have two careers.
Since that time, I've wanted to have two careers deliberately,
One of the beauties of that is you get independence in each one because you know that if you blow it in one because you stand for what you believe, then at least you can have a lifeboat in the other.
So it turns out that in both of them I've done exactly what I wanted to do and I've been unspoken to some of the stuff I see no virtue in that in itself.
But what I've done is I've been true to myself for both of them and I've gotten
big knocks.
But it's okay, because when I get, when I'm counted on one, I sort of retreat to the other, and I wait until it cools down a bit, and then I go back to the other, and they're mutually supportive.
And if that has turned out to have been a good strategy, I would say that anyone who wants to be a writer, if they have that call, should absolutely make sure that they get themselves a lot of professional.
And no, it's only recently
that it has been otherwise.
You look back to history, you see, Shakespeare, after all, was a theater impresario, and Dante was a diplomat, and Somerset Mullen was a doctor, and Chekhov was a doctor, and Carlos Williams was a doctor.
I just mentioned those three.
I did an interview with Oliver Sacks in this week's column, which is in Worcester today, and I mentioned that he follows in the tradition of Chekhov, Rabelais,
Arthur Conan Doyle, William Connick.
And then diplomats.
Washington Irving served as an American constant.
But I don't think there were any professional American writers.
He may have been the first professional American writer.
But it was a phenomenon that professional writers
but only arose after the Industrial Revolution enriched the economies of the Western world to the extent that you could afford specialties and things.
And to the extent that there was a market for reading books and articles, then you got the professional writer who did nothing but write.
And it took a while until you got to the state that we're in now, where you have writing school, where you go to a writing school, you learn how to be a writer, and then you become a professional writer, and you don't know a goddamn thing.
about anything.
You've never done anything, you've never seen anything, you've never been anywhere.
All you've done is try to be around.
But strangely enough, one of the first requirements for being around here is that you know something about everything else, and that you've done things.
Yeah, that's been John Updike's problem.
It doesn't have to be on tape, but, you know, the guy just sat up there in his... He envies people who go out and do things.
Well, I always thought from the beginning that not only the practical
to ensure that I would be able to eat, and to make sure that I wouldn't have to live in the cracks and in the shadows all the time.
But also, it strengthens what you do.
I mean, if you think about it always, any great writer has been something else.
That sort of ended with the modern age, and particularly now, when there's so much that we can afford
writing into it.
I just wouldn't do it on general principle.
I wouldn't just be a writer.
I wouldn't do it.
I would insist upon having something else in which to try myself.
In my own modest way.
This part of the country certainly figures in your writing a lot, too, in your consciousness.
My whole
But it always seems that this, not always, but you certainly do manage to get this part of the country into your writing more often than not.
It does, it's true.
I'd say it did in the Winterstown, it did in this book.
But the story is different.
It requires fire every day.
It's there, and now you see the models of the battleship over there.
It was a battleship.
How many people know that, right?
That's a cruiser up there.
That's a missile cruiser.
That's a tugboat.
Well, you were in the Navy.
This was, I believe that's the Iowa.
That was around, that was commissioned, recommissioned.
That's right.
After I got out, I was on the Missouri out in Long Beach.
Wow, those things were great.
Little battle wagons.
That's a lead on a tape and at the same time predicted the outcome.
of the South Atlantic War.
Yeah.
In fact, I don't know how to put this, but I have been correct in all the military sets.
Is this what you studied in graduate school?
That's exactly what I studied.
You served in the Israeli Army, I think, is that right?
And the Air Force.
Did you fly?
I was on a pilot, but I was up occasionally.
F-4s?
A-4s and transports.
But I was in the ground combat division.
I was first in the infantry and then attached to the Air Force in what they call field security.
I served on the northern border of Lebanon.